# Regulatory Concerns for Decentralized Systems

## Document information

Author -- [Éibhear Ó hAnluain](https://matrix.to/#/@eibhear:matrix.gibiris.org)

### Notes
    - we should consider both federated and p2p
      - Need to determine what the distinction is.

## Purpose

This document lays out concerns for "self hosters" of services that
are part of the decentralised network that BlueSky is building. These
concerns are not addressed in any comprehensive manner, though they
have been around for some time.

This document outlines two areas where BlueSky and the BlueSky
Community can help small operations hosting federated services or
operating nodes that contribute to the decentralised web.

## Legislative processes

Governments around the world are passing more and more laws governing
how internet service behave. These laws seek to control how certain
information can be made available on the internet. Terrorism-related
information, child abuse imagery, copyright infringing material,
abusive postings, hate speech and data protection are some of the
concerns that these laws address, or seek to address, or whose
sponsors assert seek to address.

A review of the news reporting around these matters shows that it's
very hard to get the controls right. Many of these laws assume that
only large services will be impacted, and some of these laws nakedly
target specific companies or internet services, often for nothing more
than populist reasons.

Where possible, civil society organisations like the ACLU and EFF,
Open Rights Group and Digital Rights Ireland, EDRi, La Quadrature du
Net the FSFE and others seek to influence the laws, either by engaging
the the legislative process or -- failing that or when some
unanticipated scenario arises -- through the courts. However, in the
main, these efforts are again focussed on the affect that the larger
organisations and services have on the rights of internet users.

An example of an exception to this approach was with the EU Copyright
Directive that was approved in 2019. During the development of the
law, a proposal that risked killing Free and Open Source Software
development was eventually removed because the impacts would have had
a serious and large negative and real impact on innovation.

In all jurisdictions there needs to be a means for the interests of
federated services, and other decentralised operations, to be
represented in the legislative process. In particular, the unnecessary
negative consequences to the decentralised web and to federated
services of new would need to be made known to the relevant
parliaments and congresses, allowing them the proper opportunity to
address these concerns.

## Support for self-hosters

For the purposes, of this document, self-hosting is when an individual
or small organisation will host a web-based service instead of making
use of the larger, more well-known, centralised services. For example,
instead of using twitter, an individual may use mastodon, or instead
of using WhatsApp, an activist group may prefer the greater
independence that a [matrix] homeserver offers.

These individuals or groups will rarely be expert on all the laws that
apply to them as hosters or operators of such services, and equally
rare will it be that they have easy access to well-informed legal
advice.

This could have some concerning effects:
- The service may unwittingly be configured or operated in a manner
  that is not legal in its jurisdiction (or in the jurisdiction a
  proportion of its users, perhaps even just one of the users!),
  exposing the operator to civil or criminal action.
- The service operator may be aware of the existence of such laws,
  without fully appreciating their responsibilities, and therefore
  will be constantly anxious about the risk of an allegation of
  illegal operation of a service
- And many users may decide that the laws are just too onerous or
  risky to bother, depriving the federated and decentralised web of a
  participant, adding more users unnecessarily to the powerful
  incumbents.
  
## Where BlueSky can help

BlueSky, and the BlusSky community could be a highly valuable resource
for addressing these two categories of concern.

### Contributing in the policy-making processes

BlueSky could work in conjunction with other, closely-aligned
organisations (such as the Internet Archive, EFF, etc.) to lobby for
consideration of federated services. Such work would include
activities like:
- Developing policies to promote to civil-society organisations and
  politicians
- Running campaigns to inform legislators
- Offering representatives to testify at legislative hearings
- Co-singing open letters

### Helpful resources for self-hosters

As well as developing architectures and technologies to develop a
platform for a decentralised web, BlueSky could also develop a suite
of resources to guide individuals and small organisations hosting
federated or decentralised services. These resources would include a
run-through of the laws that apply to them (based on the type of
service, perhaps, their target user-bases and -- of course -- their
jurisdiction). These guides will offer information such as what's
permitted and what's not, what the operator's responsibilities are to
their users and to the state, the risks they need to be aware of and,
of course, their rights.

It would take some time to put these together and no small amount of
access to legal expertise, but such clarity in this area for people
who are keen to participate can only serve to increase engagement and
contributions to BlueSky's goals.

## Resources

- [webdevlaw](https://webdevlaw.uk/), the web site of Heather Burns,
  perhaps the top policy analyst in this space
  - [Why the “Nick Clegg Law” is saying the quiet part out
    loud](https://webdevlaw.uk/2022/02/11/why-the-nick-clegg-law-is-saying-the-quiet-part-out-loud/)
    -- an analysis on how the UK's Online Safety bill, as a policy
    position, is not interested in much more than persecuting
    facebook's officers.
  - [Internet regulation debates need rules of engagement. Here’s a
    start.](https://webdevlaw.uk/2021/11/07/internet-regulation-debates-need-rules-of-engagement-heres-a-start/)
    -- how serious internet policy development should be approached.
- [Éibhear Ó
  hAnluain](https://www.gibiris.org/eo-blog/tags/policy.html) -- the
  author of this document. Some writings on the matter, including:
  - [The 3 Rs of self-hosting -- looking for help](The 3 Rs of
    self-hosting -- looking for help) -- my call for help on this
    particular effort.
  - [Response to consultation on so-called "Harmful
    Content"](https://www.gibiris.org/eo-blog/posts/2019/04/15_harmful-content-consultation.html)
    -- my response to a public consultation run by the government of
    Ireland.
